HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Cogn Neuropsychol. 2017 ; 34(3-4): 65–82. doi:10.1080/02643294.2017.1369016.

Developmental Dysgraphia: An Overview and Framework for
Research
Michael McCloskey and Brenda Rapp
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Developmental deficits in the acquisition of writing skills (developmental dysgraphias) are
common and have significant consequences for those who suffer from them, yet these deficits have
received relatively little attention from researchers. In this article we offer a framework for
studying developmental dysgraphias (including both spelling and handwriting deficits), arguing
that research should be grounded in theories describing normal cognitive writing mechanisms and
the acquisition of these mechanisms. We survey the current state of knowledge concerning
developmental dysgraphia, discussing potential proximal and distal causes. One conclusion
emerging from this discussion is that developmental writing deficits are diverse in their
manifestations and causes. We suggest an agenda for research on developmental dysgraphia, and
suggest that pursuing this agenda may contribute not only to a better understanding of
developmental writing impairment, but also to a better understanding of normal writing
mechanisms and their acquisition. Finally, we provide a brief introduction to the subsequent
articles in this special issue on developmental dysgraphia.

Keywords
developmental dysgraphia; spelling, handwriting; reading; developmental dyslexia
The ability to write is a fundamental component of literacy, and is crucial for success not
only in school but also in most workplace environments. Unfortunately, a significant
proportion of children suffer from developmental dysgraphia—that is, impairment in
acquisition of writing skills. Döhla & Heim (2016) recently estimated that 7–15% of schoolage children exhibit some form of development writing deficit.

Author Manuscript

In addition to disrupting the acquisition of writing skills, developmental dysgraphia often
has broader detrimental effects. For many dysgraphic children any writing assignment is an
ordeal; the struggle to spell words correctly or produce legible handwriting is immensely
frustrating, and also diverts attention from the more substantive aspects of the assignment
(e.g., Berninger, 1999; Graham et al., 1997). A child struggling with spelling while writing a
paragraph about frogs will probably learn less about paragraph composition, and about
frogs, than a child with typical spelling skills; and a child who struggles to write digits

Authors’ contact information: Michael McCloskey, Cognitive Science Department, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218,
michael.mccloskey@jhu.edu, Brenda Rapp, Cognitive Science Department, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218,
rapp@cogsci.jhu.edu.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 2

Author Manuscript

legibly and align them neatly will probably work longer and harder at math homework,
while learning less, than a child with typical handwriting skill. Nor are the detrimental
effects of developmental dysgraphia limited to children. Adults with significant
developmental writing deficits may face limitations in career choice or advancement, as well
as experiencing difficulty with everyday tasks that draw upon writing skills.
Despite the prevalence and significant impact of developmental dysgraphia, the topic has
received relatively little attention from researchers. A major purpose of this special issue is
to highlight the need for a strong, sustained program of research. An intensified research
effort is crucial not only for advancing our knowledge of the underlying deficits in children
and adults with developmental dysgraphia, but also for improving diagnosis and treatment.
Furthermore, studies of developmental dysgraphia may enhance our understanding of
normal cognitive writing skills and how these skills are acquired.

Author Manuscript

Writing & Dysgraphia: Defining the Scope
Writing and dysgraphia are both broad concepts, and the corresponding terms have been
used in various ways. Hence, it is important at the outset to define the scope of our
discussion, and clarify our use of terminology. In discussing writing we focus on production
of characters and individual words. Higher-level writing skills, such as those involved in
composing sentences and combining them into coherent texts, are beyond the scope of our
discussion.

Author Manuscript

In other respects, however, we define the writing domain broadly. We include within our
purview not only writing in print or script with a writing implement, but also other forms of
written language production, such as typing on a laptop or texting on a smartphone. We also
include both the ability to spell, and the ability to plan and execute the motor processes
required to generate an overt output. In the case of handwritten output we refer to the motor
planning and production processes as handwriting processes, and include under this rubric
both printing and cursive writing.
Turning now to writing impairments, the term dysgraphia has two different senses in the
literature. Some researchers use the term to refer to impaired spelling, whereas others apply
the label to deficits affecting the motor planning or production processes required for
handwriting. We include both senses within the scope of our discussion. Finally, by
developmental dysgraphia we mean impairment in acquisition of writing (spelling,
handwriting, or both), despite adequate opportunity to learn, and absence of obvious
neuropathology or gross sensory-motor dysfunction.1

Author Manuscript

1Dysgraphia (in the sense of impaired spelling) is often included in definitions of developmental dyslexia (see, e.g., the International
Dyslexia Association’s definition: “Dyslexia . . . . is characterized by difficulties with accurate and/or fluent word recognition and by
poor spelling and decoding abilities,” “Definition of Dyslexia”, 2017). The extent to which developmental spelling deficits associate
with and dissociate from developmental reading deficits is an important issue for research, and we include within the scope of our
discussion developmental dysgraphias occurring either in the presence or absence of reading impairments.

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 3

Author Manuscript

A Theory-Based Approach
We advocate a strongly theory-based, as opposed to descriptive, approach to the study of
cognitive deficits, including developmental dysgraphia. We argue that deficits affecting a
cognitive function can be understood only by reference to a theory that specifies the normal
cognitive representations and processes underlying the function (e.g., Caramazza, 1984;
Caramazza & McCloskey, 1988; Castles & Coltheart, 1993; Hillis & Caramazza, 1992;
McCloskey & Caramazza, 1988; McCloskey, 2001; McCloskey, Aliminosa, & Macaruso,
1991). Given such a theory, deficits can be characterized in terms of disruption to particular
component(s) of the normal cognitive system.

Author Manuscript

Efforts to understand developmental deficits also require a theoretical framework specifying
how the affected cognitive system is learned (Castles, Kohnen, Nickels, & Brock, 2014).
Developmental deficits arise from disruption of normal learning processes. Consequently, a
theory characterizing the learning processes is crucial for understanding the failures of
learning that underlie developmental cognitive impairments. In the domain of writing,
theories of learning are currently less well-developed than theories of the normal adult
system. Hence, we first describe a theoretical framework specifying the structure and
functioning of the normal adult writing system, and illustrate the role of this framework in
the study of acquired dysgraphia (writing deficits resulting from brain damage in adulthood).
We then consider the processes involved in learning to write, and the potential roles of these
processes in the genesis of developmental dysgraphias.

The Normal Adult Writing System
Author Manuscript

Figures 1 and 2 illustrate a theory of the cognitive mechanisms making up the normal adult
writing system. Figure 1 focuses primarily on spelling mechanisms and Figure 2 on the
mechanisms for the production of handwriting. The theory illustrated in the figures reflects a
consensus (although not universal agreement) among scientists who study writing (e.g.,
Tainturier & Rapp, 2001; Margolin, 1984; see Graham, 2014, for a different framework). We
offer the theory as a set of working assumptions that, while subject to revision in light of
new evidence, can serve as a foundation for the study of developmental writing deficits.
Note also that the theory assumes an alphabetic writing system. Although some aspects are
applicable to non-alphabetic systems, other aspects would require extensive modification to
address non-alphabetic writing.
Cognitive Spelling Mechanisms

Author Manuscript

Figure 1 illustrates cognitive spelling mechanisms in the context of a spelling-to-dictation
task in which a word is dictated, and then is written or spelled aloud. The theory assumes
that if the dictated stimulus is a familiar word (e.g., CAT), the sequence of phonemes
computed by speech recognition processes (e.g., /k æ t/) activates a representation in
phonological long-term memory (often referred to as the phonological lexicon), leading in
turn to activation of a lexical-semantic representation. (Note that these auditory
comprehension processes are not specific to spelling tasks.) The semantic representation in
turn activates a stored spelling representation in orthographic long-term memory (also
referred to as the orthographic lexicon). Some theorists have proposed that representations in

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 4

Author Manuscript

orthographic long-term memory can also be activated directly from the phonological longterm memory (e.g., Margolin, 1984), or by a combination of inputs from phonological longterm memory and lexical semantics (e.g., Hillis & Caramazza, 1991).
The activated orthographic representation specifies the identity and ordering of letters
making up the spelling of the word. The letter representations are assumed to be abstract
(Rapp & Caramazza, 1997), in the sense that they specify only letter identity and not any
aspects of letter form (e.g., the visual shape of a letter, or the strokes for writing it). The
abstract orthographic representations provide the basis for producing various forms of
output, including writing, oral spelling, and typing. Once activated, the sequence of abstract
letter representations is held temporarily in an orthographic working memory (often referred
to as the graphemic buffer) while the motor planning and production processes required for
generating an overt response are carried out.

Author Manuscript

Spelling of unfamiliar words or pseudowords (e.g., GRAT) also implicates abstract
orthographic representations. However, in this case no lexical-phonological, semantic, or
lexical-orthographic representations are available in the lexical system. Instead a plausible
spelling is assembled from the input sequence of phonemes (e.g., /g r æ t/), through a sublexical spelling process that applies sound-spelling correspondence knowledge. As Treiman
(2017) argues, the sublexical process may apply not only simple phoneme-grapheme
conversion rules (e.g., /g/ → G), but also more sophisticated context-sensitive rules (e.g., /s/
→ C when followed by E, I, or Y). For this reason we refer to the sublexical process as
sound-to-spelling conversion process rather than using the more common label of phonemegrapheme conversion.2

Author Manuscript

Outputs of the sublexical process have the same form as representations of familiar words
retrieved from orthographic long-term memory: sequences of abstract letter representations.
Like the retrieved representations, spellings generated by the sublexical process are held in
orthographic working memory, and production of the overt response proceeds just as for
familiar words.

Author Manuscript

The lexical route, which involves retrieval of a learned spelling for a word, is necessary
because (at least for most languages) the correct spelling of a word is not fully predictable
from its phonological form. Accordingly, correct spellings cannot reliably be generated
through sound-spelling conversion. For example, there is no way to predict from the sounds
of the words KEEP and LEAP that the vowel is realized by the letters EE in the former and
EA in the latter. Rather the spellings must be memorized (i.e., stored in orthographic longterm memory). Interestingly, studies show that even for languages with highly predictable
spellings (e.g., Spanish and Italian) word spellings are learned and stored in orthographic
long-term memory (e.g., Cuetos & Labos, 2001; Miceli, Benvegnù, Capasso, & Caramazza,
1997).

2Sublexical spelling processes may also draw upon knowledge of morphology (e.g., Treiman, 2017). For example, in English the
phoneme sequence /Ʌs/ is likely to be spelled OUS when it corresponds to a suffix (as in FAMOUS) but not otherwise (e.g., STATUS,
FUNGUS).

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 5

Author Manuscript

The sublexical sound-to-spelling conversion process is needed to generate plausible
spellings for words whose spellings have not been learned, including words that have been
encountered only in spoken form, and entirely unfamiliar words. For these words, the lexical
route cannot supply the correct spelling, forcing reliance on the sublexical route.

Author Manuscript

A point we have not yet addressed concerns the interaction between the lexical and
sublexical routes. One possibility is that the lexical route is first activated, and the sublexical
route comes into play only if no stored spelling representation is activated. Perhaps more
likely is that the two routes operate in parallel, such that both routes produce an output for
familiar words (e.g., Houghton & Zorzi, 2003; Jones, Folk, & Rapp, 2009; Rapp, Epstein &
Tainturier, 2002; Tainturier et al., 2013). Under this account any difference between lexicaland sublexical-route outputs would be resolved in favor of the lexical route. For example, if
for the word LEAP the lexical route generated the spelling LEAP and the sublexical route
produced the output LEEP, the lexical spelling LEAP would be chosen for production.
Although we have introduced the writing theory in the context of a writing-to-dictation task,
the theory also applies to the more common situation of spontaneous writing. We assume
that in spontaneous writing the writer begins with a message to be conveyed, leading
eventually to activation of semantic representations for the to-be-produced words. Activation
of spelling representations in orthographic long-term memory, and subsequent processes, are
then carried out as for writing to dictation.

Author Manuscript

For words whose spellings have not been learned, the spontaneous writing process is slightly
more complex. Consider, for example, a writer who has encountered the word PLATYPUS
only in spoken form, but now wants to write it. After activating the semantic representation,
the writer cannot retrieve the spelling from orthographic long-term memory, because the
spelling has not been learned. Instead the writer must retrieve the word’s phonological
representation from the phonological long-term memory, and then apply sublexical soundspelling conversion processes to generate a potential spelling (e.g., PLATAPUSS).
Handwriting Processes

Author Manuscript

Once an orthographic representation has been retrieved from long-term memory or
assembled through sound-spelling conversion, additional processing is required to produce
an overt response (e.g., Ellis, 1982, 1988; Hollerbach, 1981; Margolin, 1984; van Galen,
1991). First, the abstract letter representations must be converted to a form appropriate for
the chosen output format or modality. For handwritten output, letter-form representations
(e.g., a representation of lower-case print f) must be activated, whereas for oral spelling
letter name representations (e.g., /εf/) are required. For other forms of output (e.g., typing)
different representations (e.g., keystroke representations) would need to be computed. Here
we focus on the processes required for handwritten output.
As illustrated in Figure 2, some theorists (e.g., Ellis, 1982, 1988; Margolin, 1984) assume
that in generating a handwritten response, abstract letter representations are first converted to
allograph (letter shape) representations corresponding to the chosen form of written output
(e.g., lower-case print). The allograph representations in turn activate effector-independent
graphic motor plans, which are learned representations specifying the movements (i.e., the

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 6

Author Manuscript

sequence of writing strokes) required to write the letter in the chosen form. The graphic
motor plans are effector-independent in the sense that they are not tied to particular effectors
(e.g., the right hand), and do not specify movements with respect to specific muscles or
joints. Hence, the graphic motor plan for upper-case print B could mediate writing of that
letter with the right hand, left hand, left foot, or so forth.

Author Manuscript

Although the assumption of a progression from abstract letter identities to allographs to
graphic motor plans is common, some theorists have proposed instead that abstract letter
representations are mapped directly to graphic motor plans (e.g., Miozzo & De Bastiani,
2002; Rapp & Caramazza, 1997; Menichelli, Rapp & Semenza, 2008; van Galen, 1991).3
Regardless of how graphic motor plans are activated, the final steps in the writing process
involve the conversion of the graphic motor plans to effector-specific motor programs, and
the use of these plans by the motor system to execute the appropriate writing movements
with the chosen effector. During the writing process visual feedback plays a significant role,
not only in ensuring appropriate orientation and spacing of letters and words across the page,
but also in monitoring and controlling the shapes of individual letters (e.g., Danna & Velay,
2015; Smyth & Silvers, 1987).

Theory of Normal Adult Mechanisms and the Study of Deficits

Author Manuscript

An explicit theory specifying the representations and processes underlying a cognitive
function provides a foundation for interpreting deficits affecting that function. In particular,
deficits are interpreted as resulting from dysfunction of one or more components of the
normal cognitive system. Ideally, the interpretation specifies which component(s) of the
normal system are malfunctioning, how and to what extent they are malfunctioning, and how
the malfunction(s) give rise to the specific pattern of impaired performance observed in an
individual with a deficit. We first illustrate this point through an example from the literature
on acquired dysgraphia in adults, and then consider the role of the normal adult theory in the
study of developmental dysgraphia.
Theory-Based Interpretation of Deficits

Author Manuscript

Goodman and Caramazza (1986a, 1986b) reported the case of JG, a young woman with a
spelling deficit resulting from a head injury. JG’s comprehension of dictated stimuli was
intact, and she showed normal performance in spelling pseudowords (e.g., FEEN).4
However, she was impaired in spelling words (e.g., CURTAIN), with errors taking the form
of phonologically plausible misspellings (e.g., KERTIN). Her spelling performance also
showed a regularity effect—better performance for words with spellings that are highly
predictable from their sounds (e.g., CRIME) than for words with less predictable spellings
(e.g., KNOCK). Finally, JG’s performance pattern was virtually identical in written and oral
spelling tasks.

3Note that the terms allograph and allographic are used somewhat inconsistently in the literature. Whereas some authors use these
terms to refer to letter shape representations with no motoric content, others use the terms in referring to what we have called graphic
motor plans.
4A pseudoword spelling is scored correct if the spelling is plausible given the sound. Hence, for the dictated pseudoword /fi:n/, the
spellings FEEN, FENE, and FEAN would all be counted as correct.

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 7

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Goodman and Caramazza argued that JG suffered from a selective deficit affecting
orthographic long-term memory, such that she was frequently unable to activate a learned
spelling representation when attempting to spell a word. When retrieval of the orthographic
representation failed, they argued, JG relied upon her intact sound-to-spelling conversion
process to generate a spelling. These assumptions permit a clear and explicit interpretation
for the various features of JG’s spelling performance. Her spelling is impaired for words but
not for pseudowords because orthographic long-term memory is required for accurate
spelling of words but not pseudowords (which are spelled sublexically). Her errors for words
take the form of phonologically-plausible misspellings because she often uses the sublexical
sound-spelling conversion process to spell words, and this process generates spellings that,
while plausible (e.g., KERTIN), are not always correct. The role of the sublexical route in
JG’s spelling of words also explains the regularity effect: When she is forced to rely on
sublexical spelling processes, she is more likely to produce the correct spelling for highly
regular words than for less regular words, precisely because the more regular words have
spellings that are more likely to be generated by application of sound-spelling
correspondence rules. Finally, JG’s extremely similar performance in written and oral
spelling tasks follows from basic assumptions about the functional architecture of the
cognitive spelling mechanisms: written and oral spelling recruit the same lexical and
sublexical spelling processes.

Author Manuscript

In addition to illustrating that a theory of normal cognitive representations and processes
provides a basis for interpreting deficits, this example makes another, closely related, point:
A theory of normal mechanisms is crucial for developing systematic diagnostic methods. In
choosing which tasks to present (e.g., word and pseudoword spelling, written and oral
spelling), which variables to manipulate (e.g., regularity), and which analyses to carry out
(e.g., analyses of error types) Goodman and Caramazza (1986a, 1986b) were guided by the
theory of normal cognitive spelling mechanisms. Taken together, the tasks, manipulations,
and analyses they chose in studying JG systematically assessed each of the processing
components specified in the theory. For example, the functioning of JG’s sublexical soundto-spelling process was assessed by examining her pseudoword spelling accuracy and her
error types in spelling words. In the absence of a theory specifying the normal cognitive
spelling mechanisms, Goodman and Caramazza would have had no solid basis for choosing
diagnostic methods, or for interpreting results obtained with these methods.
Deficits as Evidence about Normal Mechanisms

Author Manuscript

Thus far, we have emphasized that a theory of normal cognitive mechanisms plays an
essential role in efforts to understand cognitive deficits. At the same time, however, deficits
provide evidence bearing on the theory of normal cognitive mechanisms, supporting,
disconfirming, or prompting further elaboration of assumptions about normal cognitive
representations and processes. For instance, the results from JG supported fundamental
assumptions about the cognitive architecture of the normal spelling system, such as the
assumption of separate lexical and sublexical spelling routes (supported by the findings
pointing to selective impairment of the former while the latter remained intact). In addition
systematic analyses of JG’s phonologically plausible misspellings led Goodman and
Caramazza to formulate claims about the functioning of the sublexical spelling process. For

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 8

Author Manuscript

example, Goodman and Caramazza presented evidence that in selecting letters to represent
sounds the sublexical process is context-sensitive, taking into account both syllable position
(e.g., mapping /k/ to CK in syllable-final but not syllable-initial position) and the soundletter mapping options chosen for adjacent positions in the word (e.g., mapping /s/ to C only
when the letter selected for the immediately-following position was E, I, or Y, as in
CENTER or JG’s misspelling of SENATE as CENIT).
Developmental Dysgraphia and the Theory of Normal Adult Writing Mechanisms

Author Manuscript

The preceding discussion of cognitive theory and research on acquired dysgraphia has
implications for the study of developmental dysgraphia. We assume that like acquired
dysgraphias, developmental writing deficits can be interpreted by specifying which
component(s) of the normal adult writing system (e.g., orthographic long-term memory,
graphic motor plans) are deficient (which, in the case of developmental deficits, means that a
component is less fully developed than expected).5 Further, we assume that the study of
developmental dysgraphia can shed light on normal cognitive writing mechanisms and their
development. These assumptions may be incorrect, and indeed have been questioned in the
context of other developmental deficits (e.g., Bishop, 1997; Karmiloff-Smith, 1997; but see
Castles et al., 2014, for counterarguments). Conceivably, atypical development could give
rise to cognitive mechanisms that are both non-optimal and radically different in structure
and functioning from the mechanisms acquired by typically-developing children. If this were
the case, we could not interpret deficits in terms of disruption to normal writing
mechanisms, and we could not readily make inferences about the normal mechanisms from
developmental writing deficits.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

This possibility that individuals with developmental dysgraphia have grossly atypical
cognitive writing mechanisms cannot be ruled out a priori. However, we suggest that neither
should this possibility be assumed a priori. In our view it is more likely that in
developmental dysgraphia some aspect(s) of an otherwise-typical system fail to develop
fully, than that a completely different system is acquired. Regardless of relative likelihoods,
however, we suggest that the appropriate research strategy is to adopt as a working
hypothesis the normal-system-with-some-deficiency assumption, and ask whether the
evidence comports with the assumption.6 If the assumption is incorrect—that is, if
individuals with developmental dysgraphia develop writing systems qualitatively different
from those of typically-developing writers—we should soon discover the error. Efforts to
interpret developmental writing deficits by specifying disruption to the normal cognitive
writing system should prove unsuccessful; and conclusions we draw about normal writing
mechanisms through studies of developmental dysgraphia should fail to converge with
conclusions from studies of normal writing and studies of acquired dysgraphia. On the other

5The normal system that provides a basis for characterizing deficits in developmental dysgraphia is not the fully-developed adult
system, but rather the partially-developed form of that system we would expect to find in a typically-developing child (e.g., the writing
system of a typically-developing 8-year-old if we are considering a developmentally dysgraphic 8-year-old). Consequently,
interpretation of developmental dysgraphias requires not only a theory of the adult system, but also assumptions about how this system
typically develops over time. Although some researchers (e.g., Bishop, 1997) have argued that developing cognitive systems may be so
different from adult systems that theories of adult systems are not useful in interpreting developmental disorders, Castles et al. (2014)
make a strong case for the value of adult-system theories in the study of developmental deficits.
6This assumption is analogous to the assumption in adult cognitive neuropsychology that brain damage does not lead to creation of a
cognitive system qualitatively different from the normal system (the “transparency” assumption; see Caramazza, 1986).

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 9

Author Manuscript

hand, if research founded on the normal-system-with-some-deficiency assumption proves
fruitful in explaining deficits and advancing our understanding of normal writing processes,
then we can have more confidence in the assumption. As we discuss in a later section the
available research on developmental dysgraphia, although still somewhat limited, provides
grounds for optimism that developmental writing deficits will prove to be interpretable by
reference to the normal adult system.

The Developmental Dimension

Author Manuscript

The developmental aspect of developmental dysgraphia raises another set of issues we have
not yet considered. In acquired deficits (at least those with onset in adulthood) a cognitive
system has developed normally, and then suffers disruption as a consequence of brain
damage. In developmental deficits, however, the deficiency within the cognitive system
occurs due to some malfunction in processes that support acquisition of the system. In the
case of writing ability, the relevant knowledge and cognitive processes must be learned, and
impairment affecting the ability to learn the knowledge and processes leads to deficiencies in
the writing system.

Author Manuscript

Consider, for example, a deficit affecting orthographic long-term memory, in which an
individual often cannot access representations of whole-word spellings. If this were an
acquired deficit, we would assume that brain damage disrupted previously-learned spelling
representations, and/or the ability to retrieve these representations from orthographic longterm memory. However, if the deficit were developmental, we would likely assume that the
individual was impaired in learning the spelling representations (or perhaps the procedures
for retrieving the representations from memory). In this case—and indeed for any
developmental deficit—interpreting the deficit involves not only specifying what
component(s) of the writing system is/are deficient, but also characterizing the deficit/s that
led to impaired acquisition of the representations or processes making up the component.

Author Manuscript

This point brings up an important distinction, articulated by Coltheart (2015), between
proximal and distal causes (see also Castles et al., 2014). Proximal causes are the
deficiencies within a cognitive system that directly result in impaired performance, whereas
distal causes are the causal factors that produced the deficiencies. In a case of developmental
dysgraphia the proximal cause is the deficiency within the cognitive writing system that
produces impaired writing performance (e.g., underdeveloped orthographic long-term
memory, deficient knowledge of sound-spelling correspondence rules). The distal cause, in
contrast, is the deficit that caused the failure in acquisition of cognitive spelling or
handwriting mechanisms. For example, a deficit in encoding or retaining information about
ordering of elements (such as the letters in a word) could impair the learning of word
spellings, resulting in deficient orthographic long-term memory representations. In this
instance, the distal cause is the deficit in sequence representation, and the proximal cause is
the deficient orthographic long-term memory system.
Claims about proximal and distal causes address different questions, and should be carefully
distinguished in theorizing about developmental dysgraphia. Claims about proximal causes
speak to the question, What aspect(s) of the cognitive writing system are deficient?, whereas

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 10

Author Manuscript

for distal causes the question is, What caused the failure of development for the deficient
writing-system components? Hence, proximal-cause interpretations (e.g., orthographic longterm memory deficit) are not alternatives to distal-cause accounts (e.g., impaired visual
attention span). Rather, proximal- and distal-cause claims together provide a fuller
interpretation for an impairment than either alone.
Of course, an adequate distal-plus-proximal-cause account should make clear how the
proposed distal cause led to the posited proximal deficit. For example, if the proximal cause
is claimed to be a deficient orthographic long-term memory, the distal cause should
plausibly lead specifically to difficulty in learning word spellings.

Author Manuscript

Two points about distal causes merit brief discussion. First, although distal causes are
typically assumed to involve rather general cognitive processes (e.g., learning, visual
attention, or other processes implicated in a broad range of cognitive functions), distal
causes could conceivably also include highly specific processes. For example, in an
individual with a deficient orthographic long-term memory, the distal cause could
conceivably be a highly selective deficit in learning word spellings, occurring in the
presence of otherwise normal learning abilities; or the individual might have a learning
deficit that, while not entirely specific to spelling, nevertheless affects learning only in a
limited range of circumstances (e.g., a deficit in learning information in which the ordering
of elements is critical).

Author Manuscript

Second, the distal cause for a deficit is probably best thought of not as a single causal state
or event, but rather as a complex causal nexus that may include causes at several levels of
explanation (e.g., cognitive, neural, genetic). For example, a genetic defect might (via
several intervening causes) lead to an impairment in sequence encoding, which in turn
causes a proximal deficit in orthographic long-term memory (see Coltheart, 2015, for further
discussion). However, we limit our discussion of distal causes to the cognitive factors that
most directly give rise to the proximal writing-system deficit.
Acquisition of Writing Ability

Author Manuscript

Our ability to understand the proximal and distal causes of developmental dysgraphias will
depend importantly on our understanding of the processes involved in the normal acquisition
of writing skills. Although some research has examined acquisition of spelling and
handwriting (e.g., Apel, 2009; Berninger et al., 2006; Kersey & James, 2013; Kandel &
Perret, 2015; Kandel & Valdois, 2006; Masterson & Crede, 1999; Treiman, 1993; Treiman
& Kessler, 2014), we do not yet have a comprehensive theory of the processes implicated in
development of writing skill, or the cognitive capacities required by these processes. Here
we provide a very brief overview of this complex topic.
The end state of learning to write is the adult writing system schematized in Figures 1 and 2.
How, though, is this system acquired? The acquisition process draws upon a broad range of
abilities that are available to children when they begin learning to write, including spoken
language, vision, attention, memory, and motor skills. More specific cognitive capacities that
may be important for acquisition of writing include, but are not limited to, phonological
awareness and phonological memory (Campbell & Butterworth, 1985; Snowling,

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 11

Author Manuscript

Stackhouse & Rack, 1986), visual attention span (Valdois et al., 2003), visual memory
(Goulandris & Snowling, 1991), and processes for representing the order of elements in a
sequence (e.g., Romani, Ward, and Olson, 1999).

Author Manuscript

With regard to the trajectory of writing acquisition, the process of learning to spell has most
often been described in terms of stage theories (e.g., Gentry, 1982; Ehri, 1986; Frith, 1980).
The various proposals differ in their specific assumptions, but most posit some type of
preliterate stage in which children realize that written marks (other than drawings) can be
used to represent meanings, followed by a phonological stage during which letters are used
to represent sounds, and then one or more orthographic stages in which letters, letter groups,
orthographic regularities and eventually morphological information are incorporated into the
spelling process. Importantly, however, Treiman and colleagues have shown that children
begin to use various types of knowledge earlier than stage theories would predict. For
example, children who would be classified as phonetic spellers nevertheless show evidence
of familiarity with orthographic conventions concerning such matters as letter doubling
(Treiman, 2003) and morphological boundaries (for more detailed discussion see Treiman &
Bourassa, 2000; Pollo, Kessler & Treiman, 2009; Treiman, 1993; Treiman & Kessler, 2014).
Treiman and colleagues conclude that spelling development is not characterized by strict
stages in which children draw solely upon only a particular type of knowledge (e.g.,
phonological as opposed to orthographic). Rather, they argue, multiple knowledge types are
brought into play throughout the acquisition process, and stages can be more appropriately
thought of as developmental time-periods marked by the predominant (but not exclusive) use
of certain knowledge types (see also Temple, 1990; Varnhagen, McCallum, & Burstow,
1997).

Author Manuscript

Turning now to development of handwriting, the required motor control is quite demanding,
and children’s writing of letters is initially slow and variable. Only with extensive practice,
around age 10–11, does letter production become automatized, fast, and less variable (e.g.,
Halsband & Lange, 2006; van Galen, Portier, Smits-Engelsman, & Schomaker, 1993; see
also Palmis, Dann, Velay, & Longcamp, 2017, in this special issue). Once handwriting is
automatized, children can devote resources to other aspects of writing, such as sentence
construction and text elaboration (Maggio et al., 2011; Pontart et al., 2013). Kandel and
Perret (2015) argue that other consequences of growing automaticity include increasing
interaction between central orthographic processing levels and more peripheral motor
processes.

Author Manuscript

These proposals regarding normal spelling and handwriting acquisition represent valuable
contributions to our understanding of writing development and developmental dysgraphia.
Even taken together, however, they do not constitute a systematic theory of the knowledge
and processes underlying the development of writing ability, and do not provide a firm
foundation for systematically enumerating the possible distal causes for a developmental
writing deficit. Therefore, a critical goal for research on developmental dysgraphia is the
articulation of a more complete theory of writing acquisition.

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 12

Author Manuscript

Developmental Dysgraphia: Current State of Knowledge
The preceding discussion of normal adult writing mechanisms and their development
provides a basis for considering the current state of knowledge regarding developmental
dysgraphia. Here we provide a brief review of research regarding the proximal and distal
causes.
Proximal Causes
A growing literature describes individuals with developmental spelling deficits that closely
resemble acquired forms of dysgraphia, and can be understood as failures in developing
particular components of the normal adult spelling system: orthographic long-term memory,
the sublexical sound-to-spelling conversion process, or orthographic working memory (see
Castles & Coltheart, 1993, for similar claims regarding developmental dyslexia).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Multiple reports have described individuals with developmental writing deficits attributable
to a deficient orthographic long-term memory (as in the acquired case of JG studied by
Goodman & Caramazza, 1986a, 1986b). Briefly, these individuals are impaired in spelling
words (especially irregular words), and produce phonologically plausible errors, but have
little or no difficulty spelling pseudowords. This pattern, sometimes referred to as
developmental surface dysgraphia, has been reported in several languages (English:
Brunsdon, Coltheart & Nickels, 2005; Coltheart et al., 1983; Goulandris & Snowling, 1991;
Hanley & Gard, 1995; Hanley & Kay, 1992; Romani, Ward & Olson, 1999; Seymour &
Evans, 1993; Seymour, 1986; Temple, 1985, 1986; Italian: Angelelli et al., 2004; Angelelli
et al., 2010; Spanish: Afonso, Suarez-Coalla & Cuetos, 2015; German: Stadie & van de
Vijver, 2003; Cholewa, Mantey, Heber & Hollweg, 2010; see also, in this special issue,
Angelelli, Marinelli, Cellini, & Zoccolotti, 2017; Hanley & Sotiropolous, 2017; and Hepner,
McCloskey & Rapp, 2017).

Author Manuscript

The complementary pattern—better spelling performance for words than pseudowords—has
also been reported (Campbell & Butterworth, 1985; Cholewa et al., 2010; Funnell &
Davison, 1989; Snowling, Stackhouse and Rack, 1986; Temple, 1986; Temple & Marshall,
1983). This pattern, often labelled developmental phonological dysgraphia, can be
understood as a selective deficit affecting the sound-to-spelling conversion process. In
addition a few cases of developmental impairment in orthographic working memory have
been reported (Roncoli & Masterson, 2016; Yachini & Friedmann, 2010). For example,
Roncoli and Masterson (2016) described a ten-year old boy who showed a pattern of
spelling performance resembling that observed in acquired cases of orthographic working
memory impairment: poor spelling of both regular and irregular words; errors in the form of
letter omissions, insertions, substitutions, and transpositions; and effects of word length but
not word frequency on spelling accuracy (see also Barisic, Kohnen, & Nickels, 2017, in this
special issue).
Distal Causes
Notwithstanding the limitations in our current knowledge concerning acquisition of writing
ability, some progress has been made in exploring distal causes of developmental

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 13

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

dysgraphia. The most commonly proposed distal cause is a deficit in phonological
processing and/or phonological awareness, suggested by reports of phonological deficits in
some individuals with developmental dysgraphia (e.g., Campbell & Butterworth, 1985;
Snowling et al., 1986; but see Castles & Coltheart, 2004). According to this proposal,
learning to spell (like learning to read) requires an explicit understanding that spoken words
are composed from smaller phonological units (i.e., phonemes), as well as an ability to parse
words into their constituent phonemes at a level of processing accessible to awareness.
Individuals with deficiencies in these phonological skills might therefore have difficulty
appreciating the relationships between the sounds and spellings of words, leading to
difficulty in learning sound-spelling correspondences, and in memorizing whole-word
spellings. Despite the apparent plausibility of this argument, we are not aware of any clear
evidence for a causal link between phonological deficits and developmental dysgraphia (see,
e.g., Castles & Coltheart, 2004). Also, numerous cases of developmental dysgraphia have
been reported in which phonological processing skills were intact (Angelelli, et al., 2004;
Masterson, Laxon, Lovejoy & Morris, 2007; Holmes & Quinn, 2009; Frith, 1978, 1980;
Hanley, Hastie & Kay, 1992; Hepner et al., 2017; Roncoli & Masterson, 2016; Romani et al.,
1999). These cases demonstrate at the least that phonological impairment is not the sole
distal cause of developmental dysgraphia.

Author Manuscript

Goulandris and Snowling (1991) suggested that deficits in the visual domain could lead to
developmental dysgraphia. These researchers presented evidence of a visual memory
impairment in an individual with developmental dysgraphia, and reasoned that the visual
deficit would make it difficult to retain the information needed for building orthographic
long-term memory representations. Also, Romani et al. (1999) described an individual with
a deficit in encoding and learning the ordering of elements in a sequence of symbols (e.g.,
the ordering of letters in a written word), and argued that this sequence encoding deficit was
the distal cause for the individual’s developmental dysgraphia. (Romani et al. also presented
evidence that the individual was intact in phonological processing and visual memory.)
With respect to developmental handwriting deficits, some form of motor-control deficit has
most commonly been proposed as the distal cause (e.g., Smits-Engelsman & van Galen,
1997; Smits-Engelsman, Niemeijer, & van Galen, 2001; van Galen et al., 1993). For
example, van Galen et al. (1993) argued that poor writers are deficient at inhibiting noise in
their neuromotor systems. Developmental handwriting deficits could also conceivably result
from distal deficits that impair the learning of effector-independent or effector-specific
motor programs for characters.

Author Manuscript

These various results suggest that multiple forms of underlying impairment may lead to
developmental dysgraphia. As our understanding of normal writing acquisition advances, we
will have a stronger foundation for systematically exploring possible distal causes, and
relating these to particular types of proximal impairment within the writing system.

An Agenda for Research on Developmental Dysgraphia
The preceding discussion and overview of the literature provides a basis for defining an
agenda for the study of developmental dysgraphia. The agenda has two closely-interrelated

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 14

Author Manuscript

goals: 1) advancing our understanding of the proximal and distal deficits underlying
developmental writing impairments; and 2) advancing the development of theories
concerning normal cognitive writing mechanisms and the development of these mechanisms.
Many aspects of the agenda are already being pursued, and we hope that this special issue
will contribute to moving the agenda forward.
With respect to characterizing the underlying deficits in developmental dysgraphia, we
suggest that a fruitful research agenda can be defined by the following fundamental
questions:

Author Manuscript

•

What aspects of the cognitive writing system show impairment in cases of
developmental dysgraphia (proximal causes)?

•

What distal causes are implicated in the genesis of these deficits?

•

How are distal and proximal causes linked? That is, how does each proximal
deficit in cognitive writing mechanisms arise from the associated distal cause(s)?

These questions cannot, however, be addressed in isolation. As we have emphasized,
answers must be built on a solid foundation of theory concerning normal cognitive writing
mechanisms, and the development of these mechanisms. Hence, the second part of our
proposed agenda concerns advancement of theory in these areas. The basic questions are as
follows:
•

What cognitive representations and processes underlie normal spelling and
writing?

•

How do these cognitive mechanisms develop as a child learns to write?

Author Manuscript

As we have discussed, considerable progress has been made regarding the first question: We
have a reasonably well-specified theory of normal adult writing mechanisms. As with any
cognitive theory, many aspects of the writing theory are in need of further development (and
even the most basic assumptions of the theory could ultimately turn out to be wrong).7
Nevertheless, the theory is sufficiently well-developed and well-supported that we can (at
least to a first approximation) enumerate the possible proximal causes of developmental
writing deficits, and investigate these systematically.
In contrast, our knowledge concerning the acquisition of writing is not as far advanced, and
consequently our foundation for elucidating distal causes of developmental dysgraphia is
less complete. We hope that research on developmental dysgraphia will both contribute to,
and benefit from, progress in our understanding of the normal development of writing
ability.

Author Manuscript

7One important set of unresolved questions concerns relationships between writing and reading mechanisms (e.g., Coltheart &
Funnell, 1987; Jones & Rawson, 2016; Tainturier & Rapp, 2001). For example, does a single orthographic long-term memory underlie
both reading and spelling, or are there instead separate input (reading) and output (spelling) orthographic long-term memory systems,
each specialized to perform different computations (mapping letter to word representations in reading, and word to letter
representations in writing)? Research on developmental dysgraphia research may shed light on these issues (see, e.g., Hepner et al.,
2017, and Hanley & Sotiropoulos, 2017, in this special issue).

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 15

Author Manuscript

Throughout this article we have focused on cognitive as opposed to neural representations
and processes, because at present we have only limited knowledge about neural mechanisms
in spelling and handwriting, and especially about neural dysfunctions in developmental
dysgraphia. Accordingly, yet another important goal for future research is to advance our
understanding of neural mechanisms and dysfunctions in writing and dysgraphia. (For
discussions of neural substrates of writing see, e.g., Beeson et al., 2003; Palmis et al., 2017;
Planton, Jucla, Roux, & Démonet, 2013; Purcell, Turkeltaub, Eden, & Rapp, 2011; Rapp &
Dufor, 2011.)

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In pursuing the research agenda we have sketched, it is important to recognize that
developmental dysgraphias are heterogeneous, with respect to both proximal and distal
causes. The writing system is complex, encompassing a broad range of cognitive and neural
representations and processes. Disruption to any of these could potentially result in a writing
deficit, with the nature of the deficit depending on the nature and extent of the disruption.
Consequently, we should not expect disruption to the writing system (the proximal cause) to
be the same in everyone suffering from developmental dysgraphia. To the contrary, we
should recognize that deficits grouped under the heading developmental dysgraphia are
diverse. Research on acquired dysgraphia in adults makes clear that there are multiple
distinct forms of writing-system impairment, including but not limited to selective deficits
affecting orthographic long-term memory (e.g., Beauvois & Dérouesné, 1981; Goodman &
Caramazza, 1986a, 1986b), sublexical sound-to-spelling conversion (e.g., Shallice, 1981),
orthographic working memory (e.g., Caramazza & Miceli, 1990; Caramazza, Miceli, Villa,
& Romani, 1987; McCloskey, Badecker, Goodman-Schulman, & Caramazza, 1994;
Posteraro, Zinelli, & Mazzucchi, 1988), and graphic motor plans (e.g., Baxter & Warrington,
1986; Miozzo & De Bastiani, 2002). Furthermore, these diverse cognitive dysfunctions are
associated with diverse loci of neural dysfunction (e.g., Rapp et al., 2015). The evidence we
have surveyed on developmental dysgraphia indicates that this category is comparably
heterogeneous.
Similarly, with respect to distal causes, diverse proximal deficits are likely to stem from
diverse distal impairments (e.g., impairments in phonological processing, visual memory, or
sequence encoding). In addition, similar proximal deficits could potentially arise from quite
different distal causes. For example, a deficient orthographic long-term memory could
potentially result from several different distal causes, all of which cause difficulty in learning
of word spellings.

Author Manuscript

This point has two crucial consequences. First, we should not take the goal of research to be
that of determining the (proximal or distal) cause of, or the underlying (proximal or distal)
deficit in, developmental dysgraphia. Almost certainly there are multiple proximal and distal
causes that can lead to developmental writing deficits, and our goal should be to characterize
the full constellation of these proximal and distal causes. The second consequence concerns
research strategy: We cannot conduct research by selecting a group of developmental
dysgraphics according to some diagnostic criteria, and then studying them as a group (e.g.,
averaging results across participants, looking for significant group effects). This research
method assumes the group to be homogeneous in relevant respects, and in particular
assumes that all have the same form of impairment. Rather, we must study participants

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 16

Author Manuscript

individually, allowing commonalities and differences across individuals to emerge from the
conclusions of detailed single-case investigations, rather than being assumed a priori.8

Overview of the Special Issue
The articles in this special issue explore many of the research topics we have discussed, and
contribute to advancing the agenda we have outlined. The first five articles focus primarily
on spelling, whereas the final three address issues concerning handwriting.

Author Manuscript

Treiman (2017) reviews typical spelling development, with particular emphasis on
sublexical spelling processes. Treiman argues that spelling patterns (regularities in soundspelling mappings) are complex and multi-faceted, and hence that acquisition of sublexical
knowledge is not a simple matter of learning context-free phoneme-grapheme mappings.
She describes an Integration of Multiple Patterns (IMP) framework, according to which
children learn not only whole-word spellings, but also context-sensitive phonological,
graphotactic, and morphological patterns that apply (although not without exceptions) to
many words. For example, Treiman notes that /ε/ is typically (though not always) spelled
EA when followed by D (e.g., HEAD), but as E when followed by other consonants (e.g.,
GET). She proposes that statistical learning processes play an important role in learning of
spelling patterns, and also suggests that learning a whole-word spelling is easier when
multiple patterns converge on the correct spelling, than when patterns conflict. Treiman’s
arguments and proposals have important implications for theory and research concerning
normal spelling processes, the acquisition of spelling, and the nature of the deficiencies in
developmental spelling deficits.

Author Manuscript

Barisic, Kohnen, & Nickels (2017) report a single-case study of a 10-year-old boy, LS.
Examining LS’s performance across a variety of tasks chosen to probe the various
components of the normal adult spelling system, Barisic and colleagues conclude that he
suffers from a developmental deficiency at the level of the graphemic buffer (orthographic
working memory). For example, like reported acquired cases of graphemic buffer
impairment, LS predominantly makes letter errors in spelling (i.e., letter substitutions,
transpositions, additions, and omissions). The Barisic et al. study adds to our understanding
of the forms of developmental spelling impairment, as well as supporting the view that
cognitive neuropsychological methods can fruitfully be applied to developmental deficits. In
particular, the study highlights the value of theory-based assessment and interpretation of
developmental dysgraphias.

Author Manuscript

Hepner, McCloskey, & Rapp (2017) also apply theoretically-grounded cognitive
neuropsychological methods in their study of two children, PJT and AKR, who present with
poor spelling in the context of otherwise strong cognitive abilities. Hepner et al. argue that
both children are impaired in learning lexical orthographic representations for use in spelling
(with PJT also showing deficiency in sublexical spelling processes), and examine potential
distal causes for the spelling deficits. They also report a striking dissociation for PJT

8This same point has been discussed extensively in the context of acquired deficits (see Caramazza & McCloskey, 1988; McCloskey
& Caramazza, 1988).

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 17

Author Manuscript

between reading and spelling. Whereas PJT’s spelling is severely deficient, a thorough
assessment of his reading revealed normal (and in fact exceptionally strong) performance,
with no evidence of weakness in either lexical or sublexical reading processes. This result
has implications for issues concerning normal reading and spelling processes (e.g., shared
vs. separate orthographic lexicons for reading and spelling), and suggests that at least some
aspects of lexical orthographic representation and processing develop with considerable
independence in reading and spelling.

Author Manuscript

Sotiropolous and Hanley (2017) also address issues concerning shared vs. separate
cognitive mechanisms for reading and spelling. These authors report intriguing results from
six university students with developmental spelling and reading deficits. All six participants
showed the same basic pattern of performance on reading and spelling assessment tasks
(e.g., impaired reading and spelling of irregular words, but intact reading and spelling of
pseudowords). This pattern is typically labeled surface dyslexia and dysgraphia, and is
usually interpreted to reflect impaired lexical and intact sublexical reading and spelling
processes. However, despite the similarity across participants in basic reading and spelling
performance, testing with additional tasks (e.g., lexical decision, semantic decision, written
picture naming) revealed clear differences among participants, indicating differences in the
underlying impairments. In interpreting the observed performance patterns, Hanley and
Sotiropolous argue that a single orthographic system mediates both reading and spelling. In
addition to the specific empirical and theoretical contributions of the study, the Hanley and
Sotiropolous findings highlight two points we have emphasized in the present article: First,
developmental dysgraphias (and dyslexias) are diverse, with multiple causes and
manifestations; and second, detailed, theory-guided testing of individuals is necessary to
identify the nature of the impairments.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Marinelli, Cellini, Zoccolotti, and Angelelli (2017) examine lexical and sub-lexical
reading and spelling processes in Italian, a language with a largely transparent orthography.
Angelelli and colleagues tested typically developing and dyslexic third- and fifth-grade
children on spelling to dictation and orthographic judgment (i.e., lexical decision) tasks.
Stimuli included not only words with regular spellings (which make up most of the Italian
lexicon) but also words for which the spelling is not entirely predictable from the phonology
(e.g., CUOCO, which is not fully predictable because /kw/ may be realized in Italian as
either CU or, less commonly, as QU). In both spelling and orthographic judgment tasks, and
for both typically-developing and dyslexic children, results indicated that children were
relying in part on lexical orthographic knowledge in performing the tasks (e.g., frequency
and regularity effects were observed). However, the lexical knowledge was weaker in the
dyslexic children (as evidenced, for example, by larger regularity effects for dyslexic than
typically developing children). Also, both dyslexic and typically-developing children were
sensitive to the frequencies of grapheme-phoneme mappings in Italian. For example, in
spelling low-frequency words children were more accurate for those with high-frequency
mappings (e.g., /kw/ → CU) than for those with low-frequency mappings (e.g., /kw/ →
QU). Angelelli et al. suggest that sublexical knowledge, including knowledge about
frequencies of sound-spelling mappings, contributes to lexical learning and, in dyslexic
children, can compensate in part for deficient lexical-orthographic knowledge.

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The final three articles in the special issue concern handwriting development and
developmental handwriting deficits. Palmis, Danna, Velay, and Longcamp (2017) provide
an overview of the cognitive and neural mechanisms in adult handwriting and typical
handwriting development. Emphasizing the complex motor control processes required for
handwriting, these authors characterize skilled handwriting in adults, and then describe how
writing is acquired over a number of years in childhood. According to Palmis and
colleagues, acquisition of handwriting involves a variety of developmental changes,
including a transition from production of characters as a series of discrete strokes (often
separated by pauses or pen lifts) to a smoother, less variable, and more automatic production
under the control of learned whole-character motor representations. Palmis et al. also offer
insights into the brain networks that contribute to handwriting performance, and the neural
changes that occur in the course of handwriting development. This article provides a
foundation for considering the nature of the proximal and distal deficits in children with
developmental handwriting deficits.

Author Manuscript

Prunty and Barnett (2017) contrast children who have handwriting difficulties as a
consequence of a general motor coordination deficit (developmental coordination deficit, or
DCD) with children who struggle with handwriting in the absence of general motor
impairment (referred to as dysgraphic children). DCD and dysgraphic groups were
compared with typically developing control children on a variety of handwriting measures,
including writing speed, pauses during writing, and quality of letter formation. Although the
DCD and dysgraphic children performed more poorly than the typically developing children
on most measures, few differences were found between the DCD and dysgraphic groups.
However, considerable variation was observed within groups. These results highlight the
importance—for diagnosis, remediation, and research—of considering children as
individuals, and not just as members of a category such as DCD.

Author Manuscript

Finally, in a fitting conclusion to the special issue Kandel, Lassus-Sangosse, Grosjacques,
and Perret (2017) bring together the study of spelling and the study of handwriting.
Although spelling and handwriting are usually treated separately in theory and research,
Kandel and colleagues have argued previously that cognitive spelling processes (e.g.,
retrieval of lexical orthographic representations) are not completed prior to initiation of
writing (e.g., Roux, McKeeff, Grosjacques, & Kandel, 2013). Rather, the spelling processes
are ongoing during the production of written output, and may affect the motor processes in
handwriting. Applying this perspective to the study of children diagnosed with
developmental dysgraphia, Kandel and colleagues argue that in children who have difficulty
spelling, the greater-than-normal cognitive load imposed by spelling processes may lead to
handwriting deficiencies, including slow and dysfluent writing. In fact these authors suggest
that the frequently-observed poor handwriting in children with spelling deficits may often
stem from the effects of spelling processes on handwriting, and not from deficiencies in
handwriting perse.
We hope that this special issue will prove useful to researchers, educators, and clinicians
interested in normal or impaired reading or writing. We especially hope that the special issue
will stimulate further discussion and research on the important but understudied topic of
developmental dysgraphia.
Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 19

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this article was supported by a Johns Hopkins Science of Learning Institute grant to Michael
McCloskey and by National Institutes of Health Grant DC006740 to Brenda Rapp, and by a generous gift from a
donor to the Johns Hopkins University.

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Afonso O, Suárez-Coalla P, & Cuetos F (2015). Spelling impairments in Spanish dyslexic adults.
Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 466. [PubMed: 25941507]
Angelelli P, Judica A, Spinelli D, Zoccolotti P, & Luzzatti C (2004). Characteristics of writing
disorders in Italian dyslexic children. Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology, 17, 18–31. [PubMed:
15209222]
Angelelli P, Notarnicola A, Judica A, Zoccolotti P, & Luzzatti C (2010). Spelling impairments in
Italian dyslexic children: Phenomenological changes in primary school. Cortex, 46, 1299–1311.
[PubMed: 20688322]
Apel K (2008). The acquisition of mental orthographic representations for reading and spelling
development. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 31, 1, 42–52.
Barisic K, Kohnen S, Nickels L (2017). Developmental graphemic buffer dysgraphia in English: A
single case study. Cognitive Neuropsychology.
Baxter DM, & Warrington EK (1986). Ideational agraphia: a single case study. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 49, 369–374.
Berninger VW, Abbott RD, Jones J, Wolf BJ, Gould L, Anderson-Youngstrom M, ... & Apel K (2006).
Early development of language by hand: Composing, reading, listening, and speaking connections;
three letter-writing modes; and fast mapping in spelling. Developmental neuropsychology, 29, 61–
92. [PubMed: 16390289]
Beauvois MF & Dérouesné J (1981). Lexical or orthographic agraphia. Brain, 104, 21–49. [PubMed:
7470843]
Beeson P, Rapcsak S, Plante E, Chargualaf J, Chung A, Johnson S, & Trouard T (2003). The neural
substrates of writing: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Aphasiology, 17, 647–665.
Berninger VW (1999). Coordinating transcription and text generation in working memory during
composing: Automatic and constructive processes. Learning Disability Quarterly, 22, 99–112.
Bishop DV (1997). Cognitive neuropsychology and developmental disorders: Uncomfortable
bedfellows. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology A, 50, 899–923.
Brunsdon R, Coltheart M, & Nickels L (2005). Treatment of irregular word spelling in developmental
surface dysgraphia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22, 213–251. [PubMed: 21038247]
Campbell R, & Butterworth B (1985). Phonological dyslexia and dysgraphia in a highly literate
subject: A developmental case with associated deficits of phonemic processing and awareness. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A, 37, 435–475.
Caramazza A (1984). The logic of neuropsychological research and the problem of patient
classification in aphasia. Brain and language, 21, 9–20. [PubMed: 6697172]
Caramazza A (1986). On drawing inferences about the structure of normal cognitive systems from the
analysis of patterns of impaired performance: The case for single-patient studies. Brain and
Cognition, 5, 41–66. [PubMed: 3954906]
Caramazza A & McCloskey M (1988). The case for single-patient studies. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 5, 517–528.
Caramazza A, Miceli G, Villa G, & Romani C (1987). The role of the graphemic buffer in spelling:
Evidence from a case of acquired dysgraphia. Cognition, 26, 59–85. [PubMed: 3608396]
Caramazza A & Miceli G (1990). The structure of graphemic representations. Cognition, 37, 243–297.
[PubMed: 2282774]
Castles A, & Coltheart M (1993). Varieties of developmental dyslexia. Cognition, 47, 149–180.
[PubMed: 8324999]
Castles A, & Coltheart M (2004). Is there a causal link from phonological awareness to success in
learning to read? Cognition, 91, 77–111. [PubMed: 14711492]
Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Castles A, Kohnen S, Nickels L, & Brock J (2014). Developmental disorders: what can be learned
from cognitive neuropsychology? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B:
Biological Sciences, 369, 20130407. [PubMed: 24324246]
Cholewa J, Mantey S, Heber S, & Hollweg W (2010). Developmental surface and phonological
dysgraphia in German 3rd graders. Reading and Writing, 23, 97–127.
Coltheart M (2015). What kinds of things cause children’s reading difficulties? Australian Journal of
Learning Difficulties, 20, 103–112.
Coltheart M, & Funnell E (1987). Reading and writing: One lexicon or two? In Allport DA, Mackay
DG, Prinz W, & Scheerer E (Eds.), Language and production: Relationships between listening,
speaking, reading, and writing (pp. 313–339). London, UK: Academic Press.
Coltheart M, Masterson J, Byng S, Prior M, & Riddoch J (1983). Surface dyslexia. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 35, 469–495. [PubMed: 6571320]
Cuetos F, & Labos E (2001). The autonomy of the orthographic pathway in a shallow language: Data
from an aphasic patient. Aphasiology, 15, 333–342.
Danna J, & Velay JL (2015). Basic and supplementary sensory feedback in handwriting. Frontiers in
psychology, 6, 201500169.
Definition of Dyslexia (2017). Retrieved from https://dyslexiaida.org/definition-of-dyslexia.
Döhla D, & Heim S (2016). Developmental dyslexia and dysgraphia: What can we learn from the one
about the other? Frontiers in psychology, 6, 2045. [PubMed: 26858664]
Ehri LC (1986). Sources of difficulty in learning to spell and read words In Wolraich M & Routh D
(Eds.), Advances in developmental and behavioral pediatrics (Vol. 7, pp. 121–195). Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press.
Ellis AW (1982). Spelling and writing (and reading and speaking) In Ellis AW (Ed.), Normality and
pathology in cognitive functions (pp. 113–146). London: Academic Press.
Ellis AW (1988). Normal writing processes and peripheral acquired dysgraphias. Language and
cognitive processes, 3, 99–127.
Frith U (1978). From print to meaning and from print to sound, or how to read without knowing how
to spell. Visible Language, 12, 43–54.
Frith U (1980). Unexpected spelling problems In Frith U (Ed.), Cognitive processes in spelling (pp.
495–515). London: Academic Press.
Funnell E, & Davison M (1989). Lexical capture: A developmental disorder of reading and spelling.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 41, 471–487. [PubMed: 2798921]
Gentry JR (1982). An analysis of developmental spelling in” GNYS AT WRK”. The Reading Teacher,
36, 192–200.
Goodman RA & Caramazza A (1986a). Aspects of the spelling process: Evidence from a case of
acquired dysgraphia. Language and Cognitive Processes, 1, 263–296.
Goodman RA & Caramazza A (1986b). Phonologically plausible errors: Implications for a model of
the phoneme-grapheme conversion mechanism in the spelling process In Augst G (Ed.), New
trends in graphemics and orthography (pp. 300–325). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Goulandris NK, & Snowling M (1991). Visual memory deficits: A plausible cause of developmental
dyslexia? Evidence from a single case study. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 8, 127–154.
Graham NL (2014). Dysgraphia in primary progressive aphasia: Characterisation of impairments and
therapy options. Aphasiology, 28, 1092–1111.
Graham S, Berninger VW, Abbott RD, Abbott SP, & Whitaker D (1997). Role of mechanics in
composing of elementary school students: A new methodological approach. Journal of educational
psychology, 89, 170.
Halsband U, & Lange RK (2006). Motor learning in man: a review of functional and clinical studies.
Journal of Physiology-Paris, 99, 414–424.
Hanley JR, Hastie K, & Kay J (1992). Developmental surface dyslexia and dysgraphia: An
orthographic processing impairment. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 44, 285–
319. [PubMed: 1565802]
Hepner C, McCloskey M, & Rapp B (2017). Do reading and spelling share orthographic
representations? Evidence from developmental dysgraphia. Cognitive Neuropsychology.

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Hillis AE, & Caramazza A (1991). Mechanisms for accessing lexical representations for output:
Evidence from a category-specific semantic deficit. Brain and Language, 40, 106–144. [PubMed:
2009445]
Hillis AE, & Caramazza A (1992). The reading process and its disorders In Margolin DI (Ed.),
Cognitive Neuropsychology in Clinical Practice (pp. 229–261). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hollerbach JM (1981). An oscillation theory of handwriting. Biological Cybernetics, 39, 139–156.
Holmes VM, & Quinn L (2009). Unexpectedly poor spelling and phonological-processing skill.
Scientific Studies of Reading, 13, 295–317.
Houghton G, & Zorzi M (2003). Normal and impaired spelling in a connectionist dual-route
architecture. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 20, 115–162. [PubMed: 20957568]
Jones AC, Folk JR, & Rapp B (2009). All letters are not equal: Subgraphemic texture in orthographic
working memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35,
1389–1402.
Jones AC, & Rawson KA (2016). Do reading and spelling share a lexicon? Cognitive psychology, 86,
152–184. [PubMed: 26999066]
Kandel S, Lassus-Sangosse D, Grosjacques G, & Perret C (2017). The impact of developmental
dyslexia/dysgraphia on movement production during word writing. Cognitive Neuropsychology.
Kandel S, & Perret C (2015). How does the interaction between spelling and motor processes build up
during writing acquisition? Cognition, 136, 325–336. [PubMed: 25525970]
Kandel S, & Valdois S (2006). Syllables as functional units in a copying task. Language and cognitive
processes, 21, 432–452.
Karmiloff-Smith A (1997). Crucial differences between developmental cognitive neuroscience and
adult neuropsychology. Developmental Neuropsychology, 13, 513–524.
Kersey AJ, & James KH (2013). Brain activation patterns resulting from learning letter forms through
active self-production and passive observation in young children. Frontiers in psychology, 4, 567.
[PubMed: 24069007]
Maggio S, Lété B, Chenu F, Jisa H, & Fayol M (2012). Tracking the mind during writing: immediacy,
delayed, and anticipatory effects on pauses and writing rate. Reading and Writing, 25, 2131–2151.
Margolin DI (1984). The neuropsychology of writing and spelling: Semantic, phonological, motor, and
perceptual processes. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 36A, 459–489.
Marinelli CV, Cellini P, Zoccolotti, & Angelelli P (2017) Whole word processing and sensitivity to
written regularity in a consistent orthography: a reading and spelling longitudinal study on
dyslexic and typically developing children. Cognitive Neuropsychology.
Masterson JJ, & Crede LA (1999). Learning to Spell: Implications for Assessment and Intervention.
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 30, 243–254.
Masterson J, Laxon V, Lovejoy S, & Morris V (2007). Phonological skill, lexical decision and letter
report performance in good and poor adult spellers. Journal of Research in Reading, 30, 429–442.
McCloskey M, & Caramazza A (1988). Theory and methodology in cognitive neuropsychology: A
response to our critics. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 5, 583–623.
McCloskey M (2001). The future of cognitive neuropsychology In Rapp B (Ed.), What deficits reveal
about the human mind/brain: A handbook of cognitive neuropsychology (pp. 593–610).
Philadelphia: Psychology Press.
McCloskey M, Aliminosa D, & Macaruso P (1991). Theory-based assessment of acquired dyscalculia.
Brain and Cognition, 17, 285–308. [PubMed: 1799455]
McCloskey M, Badecker W, Goodman-Schulman RA, & Aliminosa D (1994). The structure of
graphemic representations in spelling: Evidence from a case of acquired dysgraphia. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 11, 341–392.
McCloskey M, & Caramazza A (1988). Theory and methodology in cognitive neuropsychology: A
response to our critics. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 5, 583–623.
Menichelli A, Rapp B, & Semenza C (2008). Allographic agraphia: a case study. Cortex, 44(7), 861–
868. [PubMed: 18489965]
Miceli G, Benvegnù B, Capasso R, & Caramazza A (1997). The independence of phonological and
orthographic lexical forms: Evidence from aphasia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 14, 35–69.

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Miceli G, & Capasso R (2006). Spelling and dysgraphia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 23, 110–134.
[PubMed: 21049324]
Miozzo M, & De Bastiani P (2002). The organization of letter-form representations in written spelling:
Evidence from acquired dysgraphia. Brain and Language, 80, 366–392. [PubMed: 11896648]
Palmis S, Danna J, Velay J-L, & Longcamp M (2017). Motor control of handwriting in the developing
brain: A review. Cognitive Neuropsychology.
Planton S, Jucla M, Roux FE, & Démonet JF (2013). The “handwriting brain”: a meta-analysis of
neuroimaging studies of motor versus orthographic processes. Cortex, 49, 2772–2787. [PubMed:
23831432]
Pollo TC, Kessler B, & Treiman R (2009). Statistical patterns in children’s early writing. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 104, 410–426. [PubMed: 19691970]
Pontart V, Bidet-Ildei C, Lambert E, Morisset P, Flouret L, & Alamargot D (2013). Influence of
handwriting skills during spelling in primary and lower secondary grades. Frontiers in Psychology,
4, 818. [PubMed: 24204357]
Posteraro L, Zinelli P, & Mazzucchi A (1988). Selective impairment of the graphemic buffer in
acquired dysgraphia: A case study. Brain and Language, 35, 274–286. [PubMed: 3208073]
Prunty M, & Barnett AL (2017). Understanding handwriting difficulties: A comparison of children
with and without motor impairment. Cognitive Neuropsychology.
Purcell JJ, Turkeltaub PE, Eden GF, & Rapp B (2011). Examining the central and peripheral processes
of written word production through meta-analysis. Frontiers in psychology, 2. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2011.00239
Rapp B, & Caramazza A (1997). From graphemes to letter shapes: Levels of representation in written
spelling. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 23, 1130–
1152. [PubMed: 9269731]
Rapp B, & Dufor O (2011). The neurotopography of written word production: an fMRI investigation
of the distribution of sensitivity to length and frequency. Journal of cognitive neuroscience, 23,
4067–4081. [PubMed: 21812571]
Rapp B, Epstein C, & Tainturier MJ (2002). The integration of information across lexical and
sublexical processes in spelling. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 19, 1–29. [PubMed: 20957529]
Rapp B, Purcell J, Hillis AE, Capasso R, & Miceli G (2015). Neural bases of orthographic long-term
memory and working memory in dysgraphia. Brain, 139, 588–604. [PubMed: 26685156]
Romani C, Ward J, & Olson A (1999). Developmental surface dysgraphia: What is the underlying
cognitive impairment? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology A, 52, 97–128.
Roncoli S, & Masterson J (2016). ‘Unexpected’ spelling difficulty in a 10-year-old child with good
reading skills: An intervention case study. Writing Systems Research, 8, 143–166.
Roux S, McKeeff TJ, Grosjacques G, Afonso O, & Kandel S (2013). The interaction between central
and peripheral processes in handwriting production. Cognition, 127, 235–241. [PubMed:
23454797]
Shallice T (1981). Phonological agraphia and the lexical route in writing. Brain: a journal of
neurology, 104, 413–429. [PubMed: 7272708]
Smits-Engelsman BC, & Van Galen GP (1997). Dysgraphia in children: Lasting psychomotor
deficiency or transient developmental delay? Journal of experimental child psychology, 67(2),
164–184. [PubMed: 9388804]
Smits-Engelsman BC, Niemeijer AS, & van Galen GP (2001). Fine motor deficiencies in children
diagnosed as DCD based on poor grapho-motor ability. Human movement science, 20, 161–182.
[PubMed: 11471395]
Smyth MM, & Silvers G (1987). Functions of vision in the control of handwriting. Acta Psychologica,
65, 47–64.
Snowling M, Stackhouse J, & Rack J (1986). Phonological dyslexia and dysgraphia—a developmental
analysis. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 3, 309–339.
Stadie N, & van de Vijver R (2003). A linguistic and neuropsychological approach to remediation in a
German case of developmental dysgraphia. Annals of Dyslexia, 53, 280–299.

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Sotiropolous A, & Hanley JR (2017). The relationship between lexical decision and spelling in
developmental surface dysgraphia: Evidence for a unitary orthographic system. Cognitive
Neuropsychology
Tainturier M-J, Bosse M-L, Roberts DJ, Valdois S, & Rapp B (2013). Lexical neighborhood effects in
pseudoword spelling. Frontiers in psychology, 4, 862. [PubMed: 24348436]
Tainturier M-J, & Rapp B (2001). The spelling process In Rapp B (Ed.), The handbook of cognitive
neuropsychology: What deficits reveal about the human mind (pp. 263–289). Philadelphia, PA:
Psychology Press.
Temple CM (1985). Developmental surface dysgraphia: A case report. Applied Psycholinguistics, 6,
391–405.
Temple CM (1986). Developmental dysgraphias. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
38, 77–110. [PubMed: 3961209]
Temple CM (1990). Foop is still floop: A six year follow-up of phonological dyslexia and dysgraphia.
Reading and Writing, 2(3), 209–221.
Treiman R (1993). Beginning to spell. New York: Oxford University Press.
Treiman R (2003). Phonology and spelling In Nunes T and Bryant P (Eds.), Handbook of children’s
literacy (pp. 31–42). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluver.
Treiman R, & Bourassa DC (2000). The development of spelling skill. Topics in Language Disorders,
20, 1–18.
Treiman R, & Kessler B (2014). How children learn to write words. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Treiman R (2017). Learning to spell: Phonology and beyond. Cognitive Neuropsychology.
Valdois S, Bosse ML, Ans B, Carbonnel S, Zorman M, David D, & Pellat J (2003). Phonological and
visual processing deficits can dissociate in developmental dyslexia: Evidence from two case
studies. Reading and Writing, 16, 541–572.
van Galen GP (1991). Handwriting: Issues for a psychomotor theory. Human Movement Science, 10,
165–191.
Van Galen GP, Portier SJ, Smits-Engelsman BC, & Schomaker LR (1993). Neuromotor noise and poor
handwriting in children. Acta Psychologica, 82, 161–178. [PubMed: 8475764]
Yachini M & Friedmann N (2010). Developmental graphemic buffer dysgraphia. Procedia Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 6, 148–149.
Varnhagen CK, McCallum M, & Burstow M (1997). Is children’s spelling naturally stage-like?
Reading and Writing, 9, 451–481.

Author Manuscript
Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 1.

Schematic depiction of the cognitive mechanisms making up the normal adult writing
system.

Author Manuscript
Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

McCloskey and Rapp

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2.

Schematic depiction of the cognitive handwriting mechanisms, which map abstract letter
identities onto motor programs for production of written responses.

Cogn Neuropsychol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 November 16.

